 The site to which 1,500 families from Dunoon are expected to be relocated on Winning Way in Milnerton. Archive photo: Peter Luhanga Community leaders in Dunoon have raised the alarm over City of Cape Town plans for reblocking or “de-densification” of their area. These plans were announced in late March to slow the spread of Covid-19. Authorities are clubbing together to build what were previously referred to as Temporary Residential Units, but are now called Transitional Residential Units (TRUs) – 1,500 for Dunoon and 2,000 for the Greater Kosovo community. It is expected that some will be relocated to land situated at Winning Way, Milnerton, by July. In an open letter sent on Tuesday morning to Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, Premier Alan Winde, Provincial Minister of Human Settlements Tertius Simmers, Mayor Dan Plato, and Mayco Member Malusi Booi, Dunoon community leaders say they have mostly heard about the project through the media and have not been consulted by government officials. In a press statement in March, Simmer’s spokesperson said: “Over the coming days, we will start engaging affected communities and explain how the process will unfold.” “There is a lack of communication. It’s concerning us because the residents are asking us what is going on?” said Sinethemba Matomela, Dunoon committee chairperson and a ward committee member. In the letter, community leaders said they feared that the TRAs would become a “permanent dumping ground” similar to Blikkiesdorp, Wolwerivier, and New Rest. “The experience of New Rest now begs the question of what ‘temporary’ means and what conditions are considered adequate for the relocation of our people,” they wrote. The open letter also raised concerns about the living conditions and services such as water and electricity for the temporary units. The leaders also questioned which residents would qualify to be relocated, when it would happen, and whether there would be facilities at the TRA sites. “We are not against the reblocking, because we understand that Dunoon is very dense. Our problem is that government officials should come and consult us,” said Matomela. Demands outlined in the letter are: Marcellino Martin, spokesperson for Minister Simmers, told GroundUp that there will be a “Dunoon stakeholder engagement” later today, 21 May. He said a media statement would be issued thereafter. This article will be updated accordingly. Read the open letter.